Stocks fell on Thursday after an account of the Federal Reserve’s last meeting revealed a split among bank officials over how long the Fed should keep buying bonds to support the economy.The decline ended a rally that was ignited when lawmakers passed a bill to avoid a combination of government spending cuts and tax increases that economists had warned might tip the nation’s economy back into recession.The Dow Jones industrial average rose 308 points on Wednesday, its largest point gain since December 2011.On Thursday, the Dow fell 21.19 points, or 0.16 percent, to 13,391.36. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 3.05 points, or 0.21 percent, to 1,459.37. The Nasdaq composite index fell 11.70 points, or 0.38 percent, to 3,100.57.The Dow and the S.& P. fell into the red after the Federal Reserve released the minutes from its December meeting.At last month’s meeting of the Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee, the central bank pledged to buy $85 billion of Treasurys and mortgage-backed bonds and to keep a benchmark interest rate near zero until the unemployment rate drops below 6.5 percent.On Thursday, the minutes from that meeting showed Fed officials were divided over the bond purchases. “It’s pretty surprising,” said Thomas Simons, market economist at the investment bank Jefferies. “I think everybody thought there was broad agreement on policy, but now it seems like few of them really wanted to vote for it.”The stock market opened on a weak note after retailers reported mixed holiday sales and as the prospect of a new budget battle in Congress loomed.“It’s natural to relax a bit after such a huge day as yesterday,” said Lawrence Creatura, who manages a small-company fund at Federated Investors.“We’re off to a very strong start,” Mr. Creatura said. “The dominant reason is the resolution of the fiscal cliff. But January is usually a strong month as investors all shift money into the market at the same time. When the calendar flips, it’s as if you’re allowed to begin the race anew.”Economists had warned that the full force of impending tax changes could drag the country into a recession. The law passed late Tuesday night averted that outcome, but other fiscal squabbles are likely in the months ahead. Congress must raise the government’s borrowing limit soon or be forced to choose between slashing spending and paying its debts.In other Thursday trading, interest rates rose. The Treasury’s benchmark 10-year note fell 22/32, to 97 14/32, and the yield rose to 1.91 percent from 1.84 percent late Wednesday.
