Investors started the week cautiously on Monday, pulling the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index down from the five-year high it reached Friday.The decline occurred after traders appeared to be cashing in on some gains from the stock market surge last week, said Sam Stovall, chief equity strategist at S&P Capital IQ.Investors are also preparing for the latest corporate earnings reports, which will begin Tuesday, Mr. Stovall said.“You can summarize it as profit taking and preparation,” he said. “Investors are digesting some of those gains from last week and positioning themselves so they’re not too far extended if fourth-quarter earnings slip a bit.”The S.& P. 500 fell 4.58 points, or 0.3 percent, to close at 1,461.89.The Dow Jones industrial average lost 50.92 points, or 0.4 percent, to 13,384.29, while the Nasdaq composite index slipped 2.84 points, or 0.1 percent, to 3,098.81.The S.& P. 500 gained 4.6 percent last week after the government reported that hiring held up in December during the budget negotiations in Washington, with employers adding 155,000 jobs.Investors started the year encouraged after lawmakers ended an impasse to pass a bill to avoid automatic government spending cuts and tax increases. The law passed on New Year’s Day avoided the full force of the budget cuts, which could have dragged the economy into a recession.Investors are now focusing on corporate profits. Alcoa, the leading aluminum producer, will start the earnings season for the fourth quarter of 2012 after the market closes on Tuesday.Analysts forecast that companies in the S.& P. 500 will report that quarterly earnings increased 3.3 percent compared with a year earlier, according to S&P Capital IQ. But the events of the last three months of 2012, including Hurricane Sandy, the presidential election and worries about the narrowly avoided fiscal impasse, could make for surprises.JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and others banks agreed to pay $8.5 billion to settle federal complaints that they had foreclosed on people who should have been allowed to stay in their homes. Bank stocks ended the day little changed.In a separate agreement, Bank of America settled with Fannie Mae, the government-owned mortgage finance company, over mortgage investments that lost value during the real estate crash. Bank of America shares fell 2 cents, or 0.2 percent to $12.09.Among the stocks making big moves, Boeing fell $1.56, or 2 percent, to $76.13 after a 787 Dreamliner jet caught fire on the ground Monday morning at Logan International Airport in Boston.Archer Daniels Midland, the crop-processing company, dropped 4 percent to $28.01. Analysts at JP Morgan Chase said the continuing drought in the Midwest would most likely squeeze the company’s profit margins.Lowe’s, the home improvement retailer, fell 82 cents, or 2.3 percent, to $34.76 after the money-management firm Canaccord cut its rating on Lowe’s to sell from hold, saying that efforts to improve stores and sales would not be successful.Stock in the drugstore chain Walgreen Company gained 85 cents, or 2.3 percent, to $38.03 after a Jefferies & Company analyst. Scott A. Mushkin, raised his rating on the company to buy from hold, saying its profits could benefit from flu season, Medicare drug plans and President Obama’s health care overhaul.In the bond market, the price of the 10-year Treasury note ended unchanged from Friday at 97 17/32, and its yield was also unchanged at 1.90 percent.The yield on the note hit an eight-month high of 1.97 percent in intraday trading on Friday, according to prices from Tradeweb, an operator of fixed-income markets.
